If managing product variance feels like
whack-a-ole, then you're not alone.
Sizes, colors, materials,
configurations, it all gets messy fast,
and you're probably asking yourself,
should you reduce the number of varants
in your shopping fe? The answer is not
as simple as you might think. On the
surface, it's a definite yes. It
simplifies the data for smart fitting
and it makes it easier to analyze
product performance. But I've been
surprised often enough when reducing
variance that the answer isn't that
simple. So today, we'll walk through
three things. what product variants are
and why they matter, when it makes sense
to produce them, and most importantly,
when you shouldn't mess with them. So,
let's get into it. A product variant is
just a version of a product. Think
different colors, sizes, styles, or
configurations. And the issue is that
with just a basic example, a t-shirt
that comes in 10 colors and six sizes.
That's 60 variants of one product. And
you see this all the time in fashion is
different colors and sizes. In jewelry
is different sizes, different materials.
for eyewear different lens strength
furniture you have different colors but
you also have different configurations
right hand left hand all these things
electronics you have storage capacity
color options price options all this is
everywhere and if you don't manage them
right then they can mess with your
performance in a big way this is what I
call the variant dilemma here's the deal
too many variants equal is bad and too
few variants is also bad let me first
show you what I mean and let me just
explain it in this sheet. So here I've
just basically just pulled out the data
so we can much more easily play with it.
Let's try to take cost up above uh 500
just so we get some something in there.
We have all the item group IDs over here
and then we have cost and then rowers.
And now I've just limited it. But let's
try to go down. We say okay these two
these are the same item group ID.
They're both over rowers. That's great.
And let's try to go down down down.
Okay, these two also run the same rows.
That's not a problem. And then we start
coming down to here. Okay, so we have
two products almost the same amount of
of cost of a little bit more than one,
but one has 800% ROS, the other has
zero. What do you do there when you try
to figure out what the performance is?
Which one do you go by? You should
obviously aggregate it, but how useful
is that actually? And then let's try to
go down. Let's try to go down. All of
this is all all nice. All good. All
clean. Uh 43. Here we have overall
performance is high but with one variant
that has a low ROS it would be falling
into another campaign if we try to do
that. Here again we have two 50%
performance difference. So again is this
a massive issue for most accounts? Most
likely not. And that's why I keep going
back to saying usually when you work
with product variance it's not as big of
a deal as you try to make it out to be.
The problem with too many variants is
the smart bidding can get confused.
That's what we totally talked about
before. The data is scattered across 50
SKs instead of focusing on one or two.
The second thing is that it's a
nightmare to analyze like I just showed.
Spend jumps around. One day is on large
red t-shirt, the next day is on the blue
medium. And the third thing is that
campaign management can get cluttered.
SKs can jump from one campaign to
another, especially when you use these
performance groupings because like I
showed you before, some products or some
variants can have high performance,
other low performance, and it's all just
random. The problem with going too far
in the other direction where you have
too few variants is that I see it again
and again and again. Number one thing is
that you lose shopping ad coverage.
Fewer varants equals to fewer chances to
show and you can get screwed by out of
stock issues. If you're only advertising
for the black size uh large t-shirt and
it goes out of stock even though all
other sizes are available then Google
will not show anything and that's not
nice. So how do you fix this? There's
two ways and the simple thing whenever
you work with product variants, this is
not rocket science, you add the item
group ID to group similar variants
together. It shows Google that this is
what you're supposed to do. The second
more advanced fix is to reduce the
number of variants that you actually
send to Google. But let's try to break
it down. First and foremost, when should
you reduce variance? My general thinking
is that you should not you don't need to
panic over every single product with a
few variants. Smart bidding knows how to
work with it. Especially if you have
your item group ID with it. But if
you're working with more than 15
variants per product, that's when
problems start stacking up. And
honestly, my biggest issue with it is
that analyzing performance becomes a
black hole. It goes up and down and I
can't follow. What if traffic goes down
with one product and I compare
year-over-year has it just jumped to
another variant? All that then it starts
becoming an issue. Here's how to
approach it. You want to try to find a
common denominator. you want to keep all
the meaningful variants. So if it's
like, okay, I want to keep all the
colors of a product or I want to keep
the same like different material
variants and stuff like that, things
that people actually search for and
filter for. And in this case, you could
probably remove sizes. You want to try
to see top performers. it's hard to
actually work into dduplicating your
products, but keeping your top
performers means that if your top
performers are varants in the extra
large or XXL, then going in and saying,
"Okay, now we're only showing small,
medium, and large." That's not a good
thing or only show medium. Whatever you
do with all this, monitor results. This
is really one of those test and learn
plays and not a set and forget move. So,
how to actually reduce variance? First
and foremost, audit your current
performance. Find out which variants are
actually selling or getting clicks. Then
from there, identify the top performers
and try to find some common trades.
Maybe it's 80% of the sales are coming
from medium sizes or you can put it all
back into one version and then you
create a reduction plan. You need to
dduplicate the the variance in your
favorite feed tool. The most important
thing in step number five is that you
want to make sure you have backup rules
for availability. I'm not going to go
into details here because I tried to do
it and the the test subject I had that
we went through this. They just got
confused because that's not my tool,
etc. I'll gladly do a unique video on
just showing how to do this. But the
whole thing here is that if your
selected variant that you that you're
keeping, so let's say you're keeping the
medium size and that goes out of stock,
then another can automatically take
over. It's very important we don't try
to force everything to be in stock. I
used to do that. it just then caused
issues because when Google lands on the
product page being out of stock and I
say it's in stock then it'll just
disapprove it. So you want to have a
backup rule to make sure that just
because the one variant you include goes
out of stock then it doesn't mean that
the product entitle can't be shown and
again this is where all the all the
complexity starts adding up when we
start working with product variants and
why I'd say it's not just let's just
reduce six thing is if you got a big
catalog test for goodness sakes test
this on 20% of products first because
you can monitor performance if traffic
drops and you'll see it immediately then
you want to revert it but again if
traffic holds steady then that's what
you're trying to do and you want to roll
it out wider because if your traffic
stays the same that's the goal. You
don't want to obsess over conversion
rates on rowers during testing because
it will not have that big of an impact
on smart biddings algorithms initially
and also this is also for you to analyze
better. Don't watch impression share per
se because it can be tough to analyze
across the different products and stuff
like that. So don't worry about this.
The goal is if traffic stays the same
because we can track that really really
easily then that's the goal. So again go
back to the final question. Should you
reduce variance? Probably not. I've seen
it hurt way more times than I've seen it
be impactful. Actually, the only cases
where we've done it with a definite good
result has been with products like bras
with colors and sizes into 100 200
variants or when variants aren't
important. We have a client where they
simply just don't have sizes natively on
their product pages. So, we don't have
to send in sizes and it's really really
nice. But honestly, it's rarely it's
been worth the effort. So, that's a myth
I'd like to bust. Limiting variants
don't do much for performance in my
opinion. So, to wrap it all up, I've
been ending these videos with a quick
recap, but YouTube punishes retention
drops or if you don't watch half the
video and stuff like that. So, let me
know in the comments if you like this
format I'm going to show you in a second
or not. If nobody says anything, I'll
probably cut this part in future videos.
Anyway, the key takeaways from today is
one, product variance can kill
performance by scattering your data.
Two, you should always use item group
IDs to group similar variants. Three, if
you've got more than 15 variants, then
it's probably time to start reducing,
but not if it's not a problem. Four,
focus on variants that matter, color,
material, and overall top performers.
And five, always, always, always monitor
and be ready to revert if performance
drops. You're thinking about what to do
next. Review your product feed. Try to
find products with 15 plus variants.
Make sure you have item group IDs
whenever appropriate. Pick a small batch
to test and try to document the current
performance. That way you can figure out
whether or not this is actually working.
So always be testing, always be learning
when it comes to this. Thank you. Drop a
comment in below if you like the
takeaway section. Otherwise, I will drop
it in the future. If you're into
practical PBC insights that you can
actually help you, then subscribe. I
share tips, breakdowns, and call out
what's working and what's not. No fluff,
just the stuff that you you can use
every single